---
layout: post
title: "Day 29 — 1D CNN vs. Hybrid Transformer: Accuracy and Fairness Analysis"
date: 2026-07-07
permalink: /day29.html
tags: ["LLM", "Python", "Research", "Fairness Analysis"]

what_i_learned: |
  Today, I worked on comparing the performance of our two machine learning models: the 1D CNN model and the Hybrid CNN-Transformer model. I analyzed their overall 
  performance metrics and examined how each model performed on the ECG classification task. This comparison helped me better understand the strengths and weaknesses 
  of different model architectures and how changes in design can impact results. In addition to comparing overall performance, I conducted an intersectional fairness 
  analysis for both models. Rather than only looking at the entire dataset, I examined how the models performed across different demographic groups. This allowed me to 
  investigate whether certain groups experienced different levels of model performance and whether any disparities existed between populations. I also compared the 
  number of missed cases for each demographic group. Looking at missed cases helped me better understand where the models were failing to identify conditions correctly 
  and whether those errors were distributed evenly across groups. Through this analysis, I learned that evaluating a model involves much more than measuring overall 
  accuracy. A model may perform well overall while still producing unequal outcomes for different groups, which is why fairness analysis is such an important part of 
  our research.

blockers: |
  Today I ran into several programming issues while working on the model comparison and fairness audit code. I had some errors related to file paths when loading and 
  saving models, as well as issues with variables not being defined. I also spent time debugging the fairness audit after noticing it was only returning results for 
  one demographic group, which turned out to be caused by an incorrectly placed return statement. After fixing these errors, I was able to successfully load both 
  models and begin comparing their performance and fairness results.

reflection: |
  Today was one of the more interesting research days because it involved analyzing and interpreting results rather than simply training models. After spending so 
  much time building models, preparing data, and running experiments, it was rewarding to directly compare the outcomes and see how the different approaches performed. 
  What stood out to me most was seeing how overall performance and fairness do not always tell the same story. Looking at the intersectional fairness results and the 
  number of missed cases across groups reinforced why our project focuses on more than just accuracy. It made me realize that a model can appear successful when 
  looking only at aggregate metrics while still affecting certain populations differently. I also enjoyed comparing the 1D CNN and Hybrid CNN-Transformer models 
  because it helped me better understand the trade-offs involved in machine learning research. Rather than asking which model is simply "better," I found myself 
  thinking about which model performs more consistently and fairly across different groups. Overall, I felt like today brought together many of the concepts we have 
  been learning throughout the program, including model evaluation, fairness analysis, and responsible AI development.

---
